federalist 59
concerning the power of congress to
regulate the election of members
from the new york packet
friday february 22 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the natural order of the subject leads
us to consider in this place that
provision of the constitution which
authorizes the national legislature to
regulate in the last resort the election
of its own members
it is in these words the times places
and manner of holding elections for
senators and representatives shall be
prescribed in each state by the
legislature thereof but the congress may
at any time by law make or alter such
regulations except as to the places of
choosing senators first clause fourth
section of the first article
this provision has not only been
declaimed against by those who condemn
the constitution in the gross but it has
been censured by those who have objected
with less latitude and greater
moderation and in one instance it has
been thought exceptionable by a
gentleman who has declared himself the
advocate of every other part of the
system
i am greatly mistaken notwithstanding if
there be any article in the whole plan
more completely defensible than this
its propriety rests upon the evidence of
this plain proposition that every
government ought to contain in itself
the means of its own preservation
every just reason or will at first sight
approve an adherence to this rule in the
work of the convention and will
disapprove every deviation from it which
may not appear to have been dictated by
the necessity of incorporating into the
work some particular ingredient with
which a rigid conformity to the rule was
incompatible
even in this case though he may
acquiesce in the necessity yet he will
not cease to regard and to regret a
departure from so fundamental of
principle as a portion of imperfection
in the system which may prove the seed
of future weakness and perhaps anarchy
it will not be alleged that an election
law could have been framed and inserted
in the constitution which would have
been always applicable to every probable
change in the situation of the country
and it will therefore not be denied that
a discretionary power over the elections
ought to exist somewhere
it will i presume be as readily conceded
that there were only three ways in which
this power could have been reasonably
modified and disposed that it must have
been lodged wholly in the national
legislature or wholly in the state
legislatures or primarily in the latter
and ultimately in the former
the last mode has with reason been
preferred by the convention they have
submitted the regulation of elections
for the federal government in the first
instance to the local administrations
which in ordinary cases and when no
improper views prevail may be both more
convenient and more satisfactory
but they have reserved to the national
authority a right to interpose whenever
extraordinary circumstances might render
that imposition necessary to its safety
nothing can be more evident than that an
exclusive power of regulating elections
for the national government in the hands
of the state legislatures would leave
the existence of the union entirely at
their mercy they could at any moment
annihilate it by neglecting to provide
for the choice of persons to administer
its affairs
it is to little purpose to say that a
neglect or omission of this kind would
not be likely to take place the
constitutional possibility of the thing
without an equivalent for the risk is an
unanswerable objection nor has any
satisfactory reason been yet assigned
for incurring that risk
the extravagant surmises of a
distempered jealousy can never be
dignified with that character
if we are in a humor to presume abuses
of power it is as fair to presume them
on the part of the state government as
on the part of the general government
and as it is more consonant to the rules
of a just theory to trust the union with
the care of its own existence than to
transfer that care to any other hands if
abuses of power are to be hazarded on
the one side or on the other it is more
rational to hazard them where the power
would naturally be placed than where it
would unnaturally be placed
suppose an article had been introduced
into the constitution empowering the
united states to regulate the elections
for the particular states would any man
have hesitated to condemn it both as
unwarrantable transition of power and as
a premeditated engine for the
destruction of the state governments the
violation of principle in this case
would have required no comment and to an
unbiased observer it will not be less
apparent in the project of subjecting
the existence of the national government
in a similar respect to the pleasure of
the state governments
an impartial view of the matter cannot
fail to result in a conviction that each
as far as possible ought to depend on
itself for its own preservation
as an objection to this position it may
be remarked that the constitution of the
national senate would involve in its
full extent the danger which it is
suggested might flow from an exclusive
power in the state legislatures to
regulate the federal elections
it may be alleged that by declining the
appointment of senators they might at
any time give a fatal blow to the union
and from this it may be inferred that as
its existence would be thus rendered
dependent upon them and so essentially a
point there can be no objection to
entrusting them with it in the
particular case under consideration
the interest of each state it may be
added to maintain its representation in
the national councils would be a
complete security against an abuse of
the trust
this argument though species will not
upon examination be found solid
it is certainly true that the state
legislatures by forbearing the
appointment of senators may destroy the
national government but it will not
follow that because they have a power to
do this in one instance they ought to
have it in every other
there are cases in which the pernicious
tendency of such a power may be far more
decisive without any motive equally
cogent with that which must have
regulated the conduct of the convention
in respect to the formation of the
senate to recommend their admission into
the system
so far as that construction may expose
the union to the possibility of injury
from the state legislatures it is an
evil but it is an evil which could not
have been avoided without excluding the
states in their political capacities
wholly from a place in the organization
of the national government
if this had been done it would doubtless
have been interpreted into an entire
dereliction of the federal principle and
would certainly have deprived the state
governments of that absolute safeguard
which they will enjoy under this
provision
but however wise it may have been to
have submitted in this instance to an
inconvenience for the attainment of a
necessary advantage or a greater good no
inference can be drawn from thence to
favor an accumulation of the evil where
no necessity urges nor any greater good
invites
it may be easily discerned also that the
national government would run a much
greater risk from a power in the state
legislatures over the elections of its
house of representatives than from their
power of appointing the members of its
senate
the senators are to be chosen for the
period of six years
there is to be a rotation by which the
seats of the third part of them are to
be vacated and replenished every two
years and no state is to be entitled to
more than two senators a quorum of the
body is to consist of 16 members
the joint result of these circumstances
would be that a temporary combination of
a few states to intermit the appointment
of senators could neither annul the
existence nor impair the activity of the
body and it is not from a general and
permanent combination of the states that
we can have anything to fear
the first might proceed from sinister
designs in the leading members of a few
of the state legislatures the last would
suppose a fixed and rooted disaffection
in the great body of the people which
will either never exist at all or will
in all probability proceed from an
experience of the ineptitude of the
general government to the advancement of
their happiness in which event no good
citizen could desire its continuance
but with regard to the federal house of
representatives there is intended to be
a general election of members once in
two years
if the state legislatures were to be
invested with an exclusive power of
regulating these elections every period
of making them would be a delicate
crisis in the national situation which
might issue in a dissolution of the
union if the leaders of the few of the
most important states should have
entered into a previous conspiracy to
prevent an election
i shall not deny that there is a degree
of weight in the observation that the
interests of each state to be
represented in the federal councils will
be a security against the abuse of a
power over its elections in the hands of
the state legislatures but the security
will not be considered as complete by
those who attend to the force of an
obvious distinction between the
interests of the people in the public
felicity and the interest of the local
rulers in the power and consequence of
their offices
the people of america may be warmly
attached to the government of the union
at times when the particular rulers of
particular states stimulated by the
natural rival ship of power and by the
hopes of personal aggrandizement and
supported by a strong faction in each of
those states may be in a very opposite
temper
this diversity of sentiment between a
majority of the people and the
individuals who have the greatest credit
in their councils is exemplified in some
of the states at the present moment on
the present question
the scheme of separate confederacies
which will always multiply the chances
of ambition will be a never failing bait
to all such influential characters in
the state administrations as are capable
of preferring their own emolument and
advancement to the public wheel
with so effectual a weapon in their
hands as the exclusive power of
regulating elections for the national
government a combination of a few such
men in a few of the most considerable
states where the temptation will always
be the strongest might accomplish the
destruction of the union by seizing the
opportunity of some casual
dissatisfaction among the people and
which perhaps they may themselves have
excited to discontinue the choice of
members for the federal house of
representatives it ought never to be
forgotten that a firm union of this
country under an efficient government
will probably be an increasing object of
jealousy to more than one nation of
europe
and that enterprises to subvert it will
sometimes originate in the intrigues of
foreign powers and will seldom fail to
be patronized and abetted by some of
them
its preservation therefore ought in no
case that can be avoided to be committed
to the guardianship of any but those
whose situation will uniformly beget an
immediate interest in the faithful and
vigilant performance of the trust
publius